8.17.0 Release notes (#6224)
elastic/security-docs: docs/release-notes/8.17.asciidoc

* Fixes a bug with threshold rules that prevented cardinality details from appearing ({kibana-pull}201162[#201162]).
* Fixes a bug that caused the risk engine to get stuck in the `Installing` status if the default Security data view didn't exist. With this fix, the engine now correctly reports the `Error` state ({kibana-pull}201140[#201140]).
* Fixes an issue that prevented you from successfully importing TSV files with Asset Criticality data if you're on Windows ({kibana-pull}199791[#199791])
* Fixes Asset Criticality index issue when setting up entity engines concurrently ({kibana-pull}199486[#199486]).
* Fixes a bug that prevented the save notification from displaying on duplicated Timelines with changes ({kibana-pull}198652[#198652]).
* Improves the flow for the Insights section in the alert details flyout ({kibana-pull}197349[#197349]).
* Fixes a bug where the `@timestamp` field wouldn't update upon Asset Criticality soft delete ({kibana-pull}196722[#196722]).
* Improves {elastic-defend} for Linux endpoints by enabling process information enrichment for file and network events when process events are disabled.

> * Improves {elastic-defend} by refactoring the kernel driver to work around the CrowdStrike `CRITICAL_PROCESS_DIED` bug check (BSOD).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improves {elastic-defend} by refactoring the kernel driver to work around a `CRITICAL_PROCESS_DIED` bug check (BSOD) that can occur due to a conflict with CrowdStrike Falcon.
```

> * Fixes an {elastic-defend} bug where the Linux system call (setsid) wasn't properly gathered for RHEL 9/CentOS Stream 9 process events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixes an {elastic-defend} bug where the Linux system call (setsid) wasn't properly gathered for RHEL 9/CentOS Stream 9 process events.
* Fix an issue where {elastic-defend} can enter an infinite loop if an external application opens and retains handles to files within {elastic-defend}'s directory while it is processing a `get-file` response action. This can result in {elastic-defend} flooding Elasticsearch with documents until the handles are closed.
```

      "list_id": "f75aae6f-0229-413f-881d-81cb3abfbe2d",
      "namespace_type": "single"
    }
  ]
}
----
+
. Use the export exceptions API to retrieve the affected exception list. Insert the values for the `id`, `list_id`, and `namespace_type` parameters into the following API call:
+
[source,console]
----
curl -XPOST -H 'Authorization: ApiKey API_KEY_HERE' -H 'kbn-xsrf: true' -H 'elastic-api-version: 2023-10-31' 'KIBANA_URL/api/exception_lists/_export?list_id=f75aae6f-0229-413f-881d-81cb3abfbe2d&id=490525a2-eb66-4320-95b5-88bdd1302dc4&namespace_type=single' -o list.ndjson
----
+
. Modify the exception list's `.ndjson` file to ensure `comments[].comment` values don't contain newline characters (`\n`).
. Re-import the modified exception list using **Import exception lists** option on the <<shared-exception-lists,**Shared Exception Lists**>> page.
+
Note that the import will initially fail because the exception list already exists. After the initial failure, an option to overwrite the existing list will appear. Select the option, then resubmit the request to import the corrected exception list.
====
// end::known-issue[201820]

// tag::known-issue[]
[discrete]

> .Duplicate alerts can be produced from manually running threshold rules 

Reviewer 2: Do we link to an issue for more details?

Author: @yctercero I don't think there's a Kibana issue for this bug yet. 

@nkhristinin if there is one, let me know and I can add a reference to it. Same for the other known issue that Yara commented on [here](https://github.com/elastic/security-docs/pull/6224#discussion_r1875393972).

Reviewer 3: We have internal one [here](https://github.com/elastic/security-team/issues/9869)

Author: Thanks, @nkhristinin. It's probably best to keep this summary as it is then, since there's no public issue to reference.

[%collapsible]
====
*Details* +
On November 12, 2024, it was discovered that manually running threshold rules could produce duplicate alerts if the date range was already covered by a scheduled rule execution.

====
// end::known-issue[]

// tag::known-issue[]
[discrete]

> .Manually running custom query rules with suppression could suppress more alerts than expected

Reviewer 2: Do we link to an issue for more details?

Author: Yeah, we can if there's an issue available. For this particular one, [the issue](https://github.com/elastic/security-team/issues/9870) is in a private repo (which users can't access), so I didn't link to it.

[%collapsible]
====
*Details* +
On November 12, 2024, it was discovered that manually running a custom query rule with suppression could incorrectly inflate the number of suppressed alerts. 

====
// end::known-issue[]

[discrete]
[[features-8.17.0]]
==== New features
* Adds a signature option for trusted applications on macOS ({kibana-pull}197821[#197821]).

[discrete]
[[enhancements-8.17.0]]
==== Enhancements

> * Checks user permissions before initializing the entity engine ({kibana-pull}198661[#198661]).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Checks user permissions before initializing the entity engine ({kibana-pull}198661[#198661]).
* Updates LangChain dependencies, adding support for the new Bedrock cross-region inference profiles ({kibana-pull}198622[#198622]).
```

> * Checks user permissions before initializing the entity engine ({kibana-pull}198661[#198661]).

Author: This is actually doc'd as a new feature here: https://github.com/elastic/security-docs/pull/6224/files#diff-7f01c15eb6d32a42bc26aa620648b96cbde0a6e91b990168c8d5b0a0527cc19aR96

[discrete]
[[bug-fixes-8.17.0]]
==== Bug fixes
* Clears the error on the second entity engine initialization ({kibana-pull}202903[#202903]).
* Modifies the empty state message that appears when installing prebuilt rules ({kibana-pull}202226[#202226]).
* Rejects CEF logs from Automatic Import and redirects you to the CEF integration instead ({kibana-pull}201792[#201792]).
* Disables the **Install All** button on the **Add Elastic Rules** page while rules are being installed ({kibana-pull}201731[#201731]).
* Turns off the **Add note** button in the alert details flyout if you're lacking adequate privileges ({kibana-pull}201707[#201707]).
* Removes fields with an `@` from the script processor ({kibana-pull}201548[#201548]).

> * Fixes an issue that could interfere with Knowledge Base ({kibana-pull}201175[#201175]).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Fixes an issue that could interfere with Knowledge Base setup ({kibana-pull}201175[#201175]).
```

> * Fixes an issue that could interfere with Knowledge Base set up ({kibana-pull}201175[#201175]).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Fixes an issue that could interfere with Knowledge Base set up ({kibana-pull}201175[#201175]).
* Fixes an issue with Gemini streaming in the AI Assistant  ({kibana-pull}201299[#201299]).
* Updates LangChain dependencies, adding support for the new Bedrock cross-region inference endpoints ({kibana-pull}198622[#198622]).
```

* Fixes a bug with threshold rules that prevented cardinality details from appearing ({kibana-pull}201162[#201162]).
* Fixes a bug that caused the risk engine to get stuck in the `Installing` status if the default Security data view didn't exist. With this fix, the engine now correctly reports the `Error` state ({kibana-pull}201140[#201140]).

> * Fixes an issue that prevented you from successfully importing TSV files with Asset Criticality data if you're on Windows ({kibana-pull}199791[#199791])

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Fixes an issue that prevented you from successfully importing TSV files with asset criticality data if you're on Windows ({kibana-pull}199791[#199791]).
```

> * Fixes Asset Criticality index issue when setting up entity engines concurrently ({kibana-pull}199486[#199486]).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Fixes asset criticality index issue when setting up entity engines concurrently ({kibana-pull}199486[#199486]).
```

* Fixes a bug that prevented the save notification from displaying on duplicated Timelines with changes ({kibana-pull}198652[#198652]).
* Improves the flow for the Insights section in the alert details flyout ({kibana-pull}197349[#197349]).

> * Fixes a bug where the `@timestamp` field wouldn't update upon Asset Criticality soft delete ({kibana-pull}196722[#196722]).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Fixes a bug where the `@timestamp` field wouldn't update upon asset criticality soft delete ({kibana-pull}196722[#196722]).
```

* Improves {elastic-defend} for Linux endpoints by enabling process information enrichment for file and network events when process events are disabled.

> * Improves {elastic-defend} by refactoring the kernel driver to work around a `CRITICAL_PROCESS_DIED` bug check (BSOD) that can occur due to a conflict with CrowdStrike Falcon.

Reviewer: We also put this `CRITICAL_PROCESS_DIED` CrowdStrike fix into 8.16.2.  We're trying to get a customer to upgrade.

Author: Looks like the Kibana release notes tool is picking this fix up for 8.16.2 as well, so we're set on both fronts (for 8.16.2 and 8.17). Thanks for following up on this, @gabriellandau!

> * Fix an issue in {elastic-defend} versions 8.15.2 and 8.15.3 which can result in Windows boot failure `0xC000007B` referencing `ElasticElam.sys` or recovery mode prompt at boot.  We have only received reports of this happening when {elastic-defend} is installed alongside CrowdStrike Falcon.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Fixes an issue in {elastic-defend} versions 8.15.2 and 8.15.3 which can result in Windows boot failure `0xC000007B` referencing `ElasticElam.sys` or recovery mode prompt at boot.  We have only received reports of this happening when {elastic-defend} is installed alongside CrowdStrike Falcon.
```

> * Fixes an {elastic-defend} bug where the Linux system call (setsid) wasn't properly gathered for RHEL 9/CentOS Stream 9 process events.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Fixes an {elastic-defend} bug where the Linux system call (`setsid`) wasn't properly gathered for RHEL 9/CentOS Stream 9 process events.
```

> * Fix an issue where {elastic-defend} can enter an infinite loop if an external application opens and retains handles to files within {elastic-defend}s directory while it is processing a `get-file` response action. This can result in {elastic-defend} flooding Elasticsearch with documents until the handles are closed.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Fixes an issue where {elastic-defend} can enter an infinite loop if an external application opens and retains handles to files within {elastic-defend}s directory while it is processing a `get-file` response action. This can result in {elastic-defend} flooding Elasticsearch with documents until the handles are closed.
```

[[release-notes-header-8.17.0]]
== 8.17

[discrete]
[[release-notes-8.17.0]]
=== 8.17.0

[discrete]
[[known-issue-8.17.0]]
==== Known issues

// tag::known-issue[201820]
[discrete]
.The **Exceptions** tab won't properly load if exceptions contain comments with newline characters (`\n`)  
[%collapsible]
====
*Details* +

> On December 5, 2024, it was discovered that the **Exceptions** tab won't load properly if any exceptions contain comments with newline characters (`\n`). This issue occurs when you upgrade to 8.16.0 or later ({kibana-issue}[#201820]).

Author: ```suggestion
On December 5, 2024, it was discovered that the **Exceptions** tab won't load properly if any exceptions contain comments with newline characters (`\n`). This issue occurs when you upgrade to 8.16.0 or later ({kibana-issue}201820[#201820]).
```

*Workaround* + 

For custom rules:

. From the **Rules** page, <<import-export-rules-ui,export>> the rule or rules with the affected exception lists. 
. Modify the `.ndjson` file so `comments` no longer contain newline characters.

> . Return to the **Rules** page and <<import-export-rules-ui,re-import>> the rules. Make sure to select the **Overwrite existing exception lists with conflicting "list_id"** option.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
. Return to the **Rules** page and <<import-export-rules-ui,re-import>> the rules. Ensure you select the **Overwrite existing exception lists with conflicting "list_id"** option.
```

----
+
.. The JSON response contains the `id`, `list_id`, and `namespace_type` values within the `exceptions_list` key (as shown below). You need these values when using the Exception list API to retrieve the affected exception list. 
+
[source,console]
----
{
  "id": "167a5f6f-2148-4792-8226-b5e7a58ef46e",
  "exceptions_list": [
    {
      "id": "490525a2-eb66-4320-95b5-88bdd1302dc4",
      "list_id": "f75aae6f-0229-413f-881d-81cb3abfbe2d",
      "namespace_type": "single"
    }
  ]
}
----
+
. Use the export exceptions API to retrieve the affected exception list. Insert the values for the `id`, `list_id`, and `namespace_type` parameters into the following API call:
+
[source,console]
----
curl -XPOST -H 'Authorization: ApiKey API_KEY_HERE' -H 'kbn-xsrf: true' -H 'elastic-api-version: 2023-10-31' 'KIBANA_URL/api/exception_lists/_export?list_id=f75aae6f-0229-413f-881d-81cb3abfbe2d&id=490525a2-eb66-4320-95b5-88bdd1302dc4&namespace_type=single' -o list.ndjson
----
+
. Modify the exception list's `.ndjson` file to ensure `comments[].comment` values don't contain newline characters (`\n`).

> . Re-import the modified exception list using **Import exception lists** option on the <<shared-exception-lists,**Shared Exception Lists**>> page. The import will initially fail because the exception list already exists and an option to overwrite the existing list will appear. Select the option, then resubmit the request to import the corrected exception list.

Author: ```suggestion
. Re-import the modified exception list using **Import exception lists** option on the <<shared-exception-lists,**Shared Exception Lists**>> page. The import will initially fail because the exception list already exists, and an option to overwrite the existing list will appear. Select the option, then resubmit the request to import the corrected exception list.
```

====
// end::known-issue[201820]

// tag::known-issue[]
[discrete]

> .Duplicate alerts can be produced from manually running threshold rules 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
.Manually running threshold rules may generate duplicate alerts
```

Author: Addressed in the 8.16.2 release notes (https://github.com/elastic/security-docs/pull/6290/commits/b348cd66634baf747d3ce6b71fdb300b7e253607).

[%collapsible]
====
*Details* +

> On November 12, 2024, it was discovered that manually running threshold rules could produce duplicate alerts if the date range was already covered by a scheduled rule execution.

Author: Same comment as above.

> On November 12, 2024, it was discovered that manually running threshold rules could produce duplicate alerts if the date range was already covered by a scheduled rule execution.

Author: Addressed in the 8.16.2 release notes (https://github.com/elastic/security-docs/pull/6290/commits/b348cd66634baf747d3ce6b71fdb300b7e253607).

====
// end::known-issue[]

// tag::known-issue[]
[discrete]
.Manually running custom query rules with suppression could suppress more alerts than expected
[%collapsible]
====
*Details* +
On November 12, 2024, it was discovered that manually running a custom query rule with suppression could incorrectly inflate the number of suppressed alerts. 

====
// end::known-issue[]

[discrete]
[[features-8.17.0]]
==== New features
* Adds a signature option for trusted applications on macOS ({kibana-pull}197821[#197821]).

> * Lets you use alert suppression on EQL sequence alerts ({kibana-pull}189725[#189725]).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Allows you to use alert suppression on EQL sequence alerts ({kibana-pull}189725[#189725]).
```

> * Allows you to use alert suppression on EQL sequence alerts ({kibana-pull}189725[#189725]).

Reviewer 7: Please remove the suppression note - it's not in 8.17. Thanks!

Author: Removed in https://github.com/elastic/security-docs/pull/6313.

> * Adds GA support for the case action feature, which let rules automatically create cases ({kibana-pull}196973[#196973]).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Adds GA support for the case action feature, which lets rules automatically create cases ({kibana-pull}196973[#196973]).
```

[discrete]
[[enhancements-8.17.0]]
==== Enhancements
* Checks user permissions before initializing the entity engine ({kibana-pull}198661[#198661]).
* Updates LangChain dependencies, adding support for the new Bedrock cross-region inference profiles ({kibana-pull}198622[#198622]).

[discrete]
[[bug-fixes-8.17.0]]
==== Bug fixes
* Clears the error on the second entity engine initialization ({kibana-pull}202903[#202903]).
* Modifies the empty state message that appears when installing prebuilt rules ({kibana-pull}202226[#202226]).

> * Rejects CEF logs from Automatic Import and redirects you to the CEF integration instead ({kibana-pull}201792[#201792], {kibana-pull}202994[#202994]).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Rejects CEF logs from Automatic Import and instead redirects you to the CEF integration ({kibana-pull}201792[#201792], {kibana-pull}202994[#202994]).
```

> * Fixes a bug in Automatic Import where icons were not shown after the integration was installed ({kibana-pull}201139[#201139]).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Fixes a bug in Automatic Import where icons did not display after the integration was installed ({kibana-pull}201139[#201139]).
```

* Removes an erroneous duplicate Preserve Original Event flag as one was additionally added from the common settings file ({kibana-pull}201622[#201622]).
* Turns off the **Install All** button on the **Add Elastic Rules** page while rules are being installed ({kibana-pull}201731[#201731]).

> * Turns off the **Add note** button in the alert details flyout if you're lacking adequate privileges ({kibana-pull}201707[#201707]).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Turns off the **Add note** button in the alert details flyout if you don't have the appropriate permission ({kibana-pull}201707[#201707]).
```

* Removes fields with an `@` from the script processor ({kibana-pull}201548[#201548]).
* Fixes an issue that could interfere with Knowledge Base set up ({kibana-pull}201175[#201175]).

> * Fixes an issue with Gemini streaming in the AI Assistant  ({kibana-pull}201299[#201299]).

Author: ```suggestion
* Fixes an issue with Gemini streaming in the AI Assistant ({kibana-pull}201299[#201299]).
```

* Updates LangChain dependencies, adding support for the new Bedrock cross-region inference endpoints ({kibana-pull}198622[#198622]).
* Fixes a bug with threshold rules that prevented cardinality details from appearing ({kibana-pull}201162[#201162]).
* Fixes a bug that caused an entity engine to get stuck in the `Installing` status if the default Security data view didn't exist. With this fix, engines now correctly report the `Error` state ({kibana-pull}201140[#201140]).
* Fixes an issue that prevented you from successfully importing TSV files with asset criticality data if you're on Windows ({kibana-pull}199791[#199791]).
* Fixes asset criticality index issue when setting up entity engines concurrently ({kibana-pull}199486[#199486]).
* Fixes a bug where the `@timestamp` field wouldn't update upon asset criticality soft delete ({kibana-pull}196722[#196722]).
* Fixes a bug that prevented the save notification from displaying on duplicated Timelines with changes ({kibana-pull}198652[#198652]).
* Improves the flow for the Insights section in the alert details flyout ({kibana-pull}197349[#197349]).

> * Users without {fleet} read privilege were blocked from interacting with any onboarding card, this has been fixed ({kibana-pull}202413[#202413]).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Fixes an issue where users without the {fleet} `read` permission were blocked from interacting with any onboarding card ({kibana-pull}202413[#202413]).
```

* Improves {elastic-defend} for Linux endpoints by enabling process information enrichment for file and network events when process events are disabled.
* Improves {elastic-defend} by refactoring the kernel driver to work around a `CRITICAL_PROCESS_DIED` bug check (BSOD) that can occur due to a conflict with CrowdStrike Falcon.

> * Fixes an issue in {elastic-defend} versions 8.15.2 and 8.15.3 which can result in Windows boot failure `0xC000007B` referencing `ElasticElam.sys` or recovery mode prompt at boot.  We have only received reports of this happening when {elastic-defend} is installed alongside CrowdStrike Falcon.

Author: ```suggestion
* Fixes an issue in {elastic-defend} versions 8.15.2 and 8.15.3 which can result in Windows boot failure `0xC000007B` referencing `ElasticElam.sys` or recovery mode prompt at boot. We have only received reports of this happening when {elastic-defend} is installed alongside CrowdStrike Falcon.
```
